---
title: TDS Configuration Overview
last_updated: 2020-10-03
sidebar: admin_sidebar
toc: true
permalink: configuration_overview.html
---

## Configuration Catalogs  

The TDS is configured with XML files which are called **configuration catalogs** (they also can be referenced as **server-side** catalogs).

The configuration catalogs contain information detailing the datasets the TDS will serve and what services will be available for each dataset. 

### Location 

The TDS configuration files are located in the `thredds` subdirectory of the [TDS Content Directory](tds_content_directory.html) (`tds.content.root.path`) [specified in `$JAVA_OPTS`](jvm_settings.html#tds-content-directory) setting for the JVM.

The TDS comes with the configuration files (note that not all of them contain the word 'catalog' in their name): 

|---------|--------------|
| Name | Description |
|:--------|:-------------|
| `catalog.xml` | This is the main TDS _client_ configuration file (a.k.a, the _root catalog_) used to serve data. <br/>[[more information]](catalog.html) |
| `enhancedCatalog.xml` | Example configuration catalog, demonstrating advanced features (referenced from `catalog.xml`).<br/>[[more information]](enhanced_catalog.html)  |
| `threddsConfig.xml` | Main TDS configuration file for allowing non-default services, configuring caching, etc.<br/>[[more information]](thredds_config.html) |
| `wmsConfig.xml` | A configuration file for the THREDDS Web Mapping Service (WMS).<br>[[more information]](wms_ref.html) |

## Nomenclature

Before continuing, there is a problem with nomenclature that needs to be addressed:

### Configuration Catalogs Versus Client Catalogs
Unfortunately, the term "catalog" is used for more than just TDS configuration files.  

It can also be used to reference the HTML and XML displays the TDS produces for client consumption.
These **client catalogs** display data and are accessible via HTTP and other protocols.

#### Example Of A Client Catalog

Here is an example of a client-side catalog generated by the TDS for GOES East Rebroadcast Satellite Data.  
It is available in both HTML and XML format:

* <https://thredds.ucar.edu/thredds/catalog/satellite/goes/east/grb/catalog.html>
* <https://thredds.ucar.edu/thredds/catalog/satellite/goes/east/grb/catalog.xml>

#### Knowing The Difference Between The Two

The TDS configuration catalogs represent the top-level client catalogs served by the TDS. 
Specifically, the TDS takes the information in the configuration catalogs and uses it to generate the client catalogs.
The configuration information in the catalog file is only needed by the server, and the client view of the catalogs do not contain any server specific configuration information. 

It can be confusing to differentiate between the two uses of the term "catalog."
Therefore, in this documentation, we are careful to make the distinction between *configuration* catalogs and *client* catalogs.

When in doubt, think:
* Configuration catalog = server-side
* Client Catalog = client-side

{% include info.html content="
The client catalogs are explained in greater detail in the TDS User's Guide.
"%} 

## How To Proceed With Configuration

THREDDS catalogs collect, organize, and describe accessible datasets. 
They provide a hierarchical structure for organizing the datasets as well as an access method (URL), and a human-understandable name for each dataset. 
Further descriptive information about each dataset can also be added.

Use the information in the Configuration section of this documentation, and reference the [catalog specification](server_side_catalog_specification.html) to create your own catalogs.

A good place to start is to modify the [existing catalogs](#location) for your own purposes.

**You MUST use the root [`catalog.xml`](catalog.html) and [`threddsConfig.xml`](enhanced_catalog.html) files**. 
The TDS consults these files on startup.
The [`enhancedCatalog.xml`](enhanced_catalog.html) and [`wmsConfig.xml`](wms_ref.html) files are optional.